# Chapter 1. Introduction

Creating a collection like this practically means initiating a dialogue with relics of bygone times, either of distant or recent past. We treasure their memories – and here we mean those of man-made environments above all – in our minds when travelling, walking the streets everyday, watching TV, or even as a random, disorderly mass of visual effects when surfing the Internet. The dialogue is thus the process of making ourselves aware of these experiences, as well as cataloguing them. A selection of this kind is especially important for both architects and students of architecture. This is the role which the present collection is meant to play in this special topic.

Our using the word awareness is both purposeful and important within this textual context and is by no means to be understood or mistaken as a scientific approach. Undoubtedly, intuition, as opposed to analytical methods, has been a significant agent when creating this database. If we piled up the collected experiences (period, material, site and location) on simple and impassionate shelves, we could easily avoid skipping the most relevant questions and answers applicable in architectural design, which could contain the most relevant responses.

Our collection is meant to present and systematize low-rise, high-density residential developments. Thus, we analyse forms of housing in which constituents – typically dwelling units and their complementary functions – are orchestrated into a certain system to create a harmonious unity, an integral composition also interpretable in itself. What is actually meant by low-rise, high-density development? There are numerous interpretations, primarily defining the concept in terms of the quantity of co-ordinated components contained. Some approaches prioritize housing density, while others rate certain forms of housing according to the method of development and thus relate them in the relevant categories. Kálmán Timon uses the expression “modern developments with gardens” in his book. Contemporary and with a garden. To define the network of classification we have used just now, it seems necessary to clarify these two concepts.

## Contemporariness – Presence

We may approach the concept of contemporariness by interpreting its counterpart or opposite, which is out-of-date, not in tune with the Zeitgeist, discordant with the requirements of the period, anachronistic. Accordingly, contemporary (modern) is in line with Zeitgeist and meets the prevailing requirements of its time. It is important to note here that, in the context of this selection, contemporariness is by no means the equivalent of novelty (modernness), since it is not driven by the ambition “to differ by all means” or by the aspiration to innovate, but by presence, the responses ripened in several stages so as to meet the challenges of “here and now”. In the reality of the present, it is the ambition to create attachment and bonding – both in time and space – which is the most important motivation: the way a building meets the challenges of current conditions of time and space (experienced as a continuum) and gives architectural responses to them driven by practicality and sensitivity to problems. A need for presence is, of course, a constant factor throughout the history of architecture. However, as we shall see apropos of certain projects referred to here, it is a most changeable value rooted in time and space. Thus, we rely upon it as one of the cornerstones of our classification.

## Garden

The garden has been and is present in architecture in numerous formats and ways. Its significance is far from being a novelty to deal with. The presence of fences is a basic manifestation of each garden variety. In this respect, the garden essentially differs from landscape, which lacks defined boundaries. The very act of raising a fence (enclosing) transforms the garden into an architectural category (enclosure) which is part of every project we have included here as a spiritual and physical basic need. However, its role and niche within the composition, its rank in the hierarchy, significantly varies depending on the tracery and density of the development.

Introduction

## Densification and Tracery

We have not yet touched upon the concept of density, which is a key aspect of classification. The developments presented here primarily feature what we regard as independent of location, of cultural and social environment: it is the tracery often fed by extreme densification, the wide variety and versatility of structures, the hierarchy of the composition of the development as such. When interpreting densification as an abstract concept related to architecture, we may think of several associations. One could think of a system growing in an additive way which actually consumes the “empty” space (void) surrounding it, while expanding and thus saturating and condensing it. We may as well associate it with the process whereby built spaces enclose space from the endless domain of nature for our purposes when buildings grow and expand. It can also be interpreted as a two dimensional flat composition made up of layered and co-ordinated lines and patches that an architect immediately grasps with his spatial thinking as a system, the disposition of spaces and volumes, a three-dimensional structure. In this selection, we make distinctions between archetypes according to tracery, the means of densification that convey and maintain architectural continuity by virtue of their permanent character.

## The Structuring of the Present Selection

We have not yet touched upon the concept of density, which is a key aspect of classification. The developments presented here primarily feature what we regard as independent of location, of cultural and social environment: it is the tracery often fed by extreme densification, the wide variety and versatility of structures, the hierarchy of the composition of the development as such. When interpreting densification as an abstract concept related to architecture, we may think of several associations. One could think of a system growing in an additive way which actually consumes the “empty” space (void) surrounding it, while expanding and thus saturating and condensing it. We may as well associate it with the process whereby built spaces enclose space from the endless domain of nature for our purposes when buildings grow and expand. It can also be interpreted as a two dimensional flat composition made up of layered and co-ordinated lines and patches that an architect immediately grasps with his spatial thinking as a system, the disposition of spaces and volumes, a three-dimensional structure. In this selection, we make distinctions between archetypes according to tracery, the means of densification that convey and maintain architectural continuity by virtue of their permanent character.

