# Chapter 4. Low-Rise, High-DensityDevelopments in the 20th Century

The first half of our selection was devoted to historic examples which we analysed as compositions to observe general principles and behavioural forms that we also classified as various typologies. In the latter half of our collection, we present developments as variations on permanent features. These two aspects of analysis are relevant and applied in each description, illustrating how each architectural work contains elements of permanence and change simultaneously, and that new structures are also vehicles of living meaning.

After surveying the possible typological correlations, observable changes (as opposed to what is “general”) are more emphasised when analysing 20th-century and contemporary examples. The history of architecture is fostered by the multitudes of such minor deformations in comparison with permanent features. We seek explanations for these deformations in their correlations with location, period and cultural context, as opposed to general principles of composition. As a result, the concepts we have introduced before (such as contemporariness, presence and garden) reoccur. Lessons of the analyses of these concepts are just as important as the clarity of typology and composition, which we referred to in detail previously. When perpetuating general behavioural forms, observed and consciously applied, these areas foster innovative designers’ thinking and guarantee that designs and works do not fall behind the times and become obsolete. Presence and the garden thus attain key roles apropos the projects analysed here, and the continuous revision of these two categories are especially important during design work.

A fascinating example of the latent continuity and renaissance of patterns and types is the terraced structure featured in 10th-century India, 20th-century and contemporary Japanese architecture, much in the same way as a genuinely progressive Danish apartment building system. The “miraculous well” (chand bori) of Abhaneri, the terraced structure of the Japanese Metabolist master Kiyonori Kikukate near the hills of Mishima, the “Pasadena Heights”, Tadao Ando’s botanical garden on the island of Awaji, and the mound house of BIG, a team of Danish architects built in Copenhagen in 2007 – all derive from the same centuries-old tracery, which is continued by responding to issues of presence.

## Contemporarineses and Presence in the 20th Century

One of the most prominent architectural challenges of the last century was the general shortage of housing and, in its wake, the lack of quality housing that persists today. From the industrial revolution on, overpopulation due to masses of people flocking to towns and cities, increasingly intolerable crowding, ravaging epidemics and crime stripped town-dwellers of their human dignity. The lack of housing grew intolerable in the post-war era. To respond to this issue, housing development projects were targeted to construct numerous cost-efficient apartments. Apartment houses, villas and mansions, as well as single-family houses proved uneconomical because of construction and maintenance costs, as well as the provision of infrastructure. Hence, there was no comprehensive solution to the most burning issue of the 20th century. Multi-apartment buildings, though comfortingly economical, did not allow for meaningful contact with gardens and nature. The population boom necessitated quests for solving the issues of housing shortage. Simultaneously with the increasing demand for housing, the potentials of high-density developments with gardens came in focus as a viable form of large-scale housing. In 1902, Sir Ebenezer Howard, in his book entitled Garden Cities of To-morrow, argued that this kind of development may constitute an integrated foundation for more efficient urban life, instead of rural retreat. This form of development provides architects with a non-stop revival for architects in the 20th century and today. As examples of our collection prove, the past century or so saw a large number of successful attempts to spread this concept broadly. Our collection is not meant by any means to survey the entirety of 20th-century architectural history. We have only focussed on examples relevant and important for us, since they contain special lessons for aspects of presence and garden

Low-Rise, High-Density Developments in the 20th Century

uses. In this introduction, we only have three prominent factors that repeatedly fuel this widespread housing form, while also giving it new directions.

Breaking away from former stylistic canons, modern architects prioritized function and envisioned highly viable apartments responding to the changing lifestyle. This approach resulted in the improvement of housing standards, as well as the quality of life in general. Living spaces bathed in light brought about issues of the individual’s autonomy. Besides the former practical considerations, spatial organisation tailor-made to suit a variety of lifestyles became important. Although the strengths of Modernism permeate architecture even today, the past seventy years saw numerous attempts to ameliorate its imperfections, thus differentiating these codified residential environments.

A most exciting trend for us is Structuralism, born in the Netherlands, one of the centres of highdensity modern developments featuring gardens. Representatives of this movement realised that the modern city has broken up into anatomically specialised, lifeless cells. As a result, historic values such as the plazas, streets, enclosures, courtyards and gardens have been lost. This is the reason why a new goal set was to restore life’s entirety and the organic nature of developments. Exemplary patterns were borrowed from indigenous peoples, since their settlements revealed a confluence of simple geometric order and humanism. As they argue, living streets interspersed with bazaars and systematic order must be simultaneously present in architecture. As an influence of Dutch Structuralists, functionally complex organisation evoking that of the kasbahs, combined with “functional mix” and “labyrinthine order” in today’s interpretation, gave new life to the frozen white sculptures of the Modernism.

Starting millennia ago, tendencies in the spirit of permanence and change are still underway, and although the proximity in time makes it difficult to assess purely architectural values, dedication to contemporariness and the quest for presence permeates even the most recent examples of our selection. Pandemic at the turn of the millennia is the atomization of societies, the total collapse of communities and the isolation of individuals. Although restoring collective thinking and responsibility is not a task for architecture exclusively, we believe that participatory ways of thinking and collective design work may be the most important duties today, besides economic considerations, to reform the basis for building residential and other micro-communities.

## The 20th-century Garden

Changes in the role of the garden are ever-important, intriguing aspects. Initially, it was obviously a vegetable garden that belonged to the house. However, this role was gradually taken over by practical, functional and symbolic contents resulting from density, urban lifestyles or the 20th-century manner of living. Allowing light into interiors and the cooling effects of evaporating water surfaces in shady internal courtyards (against a backdrop of certain climatic conditions) were functional considerations present at the time of our historic examples. These days, they are back in focus again. In the Netherlands, where residential areas are reclaimed from the sea, an experimental development in Ijburg near Amsterdam transforms the classic form of the garden. Divided from the sea, the water of the bay regulated by floodgates fills in the space between the floating building components. Besides practical considerations, the role of the symbolic contents of the garden is becoming increasingly tangible. It may function as the venue for recreation and relaxation, can isolate us from the street bustle or connect us with nature and landscape.

## The Structuring of the Collection of 20thcentury Examples

The latter half of this collection contains seven chapters. International and Hungarian examples from the first half of the 20th century are followed by a similar selection from the latter half of the 20th century, and we have used the same classification to present contemporary projects, finishing the selection with those illustrating sustainability.

