# Chapter 2. The Historic Forms of Low-Rise, High-Density Developments

## The Significance of Historic Projects

As Tamás Tomay argues, “each building is a continuation”. This, in turn, means that the history of architecture is an evolution of follow-up projects and densifications, not only in the physical, but also in the conceptual sense. This statement deserves special attention apropos of our selection, since it focuses on the importance of continuity and the significance of hidden correlations. It is our aim to present characteristic permanent forms of behaviour, unique variations of the (arche)types evolving throughout centuries and continuously shaped by the need to respond to challenges of contemporariness and presence. Each constituent forms part of a process with antecedents, and most probably they do not represent the end of a journey. Appropriate and moderate changes are only viable in the knowledge of the foregoing; thus, we approach historic examples as the repositories of these antecedents. The continuity of architecture is not unlike a unique ontogenesis, a kind of evolution which features both construction as an activity and the thought creating buildings. Hence, the significance of historic prototypes for us lies in the relation between permanence and uniqueness: a logic we hereby clarify.

## The Logic of Historic Examples

The historic projects we included here reflect approaches from the aspect of composition. They accentuate basic features of composition along geometric correlations that influence it. As functional purity was typically a later development in the wide temporal spectrum of the evolution of historic examples, and only appeared with modernisation, we did not exclusively focus on residential function. The developments cited here include towns existing and evolving even today, closed and yet functionally complex residential systems, hermitages, settlements already destroyed and even ensembles from all over the world. Their geographical and regional diversity was intentional. We tried our best to include examples that characterise each type, both from Europe and beyond, buildings and developments without architects (indigenous or or vernacular architecture), as well as works of architectural art to prove the general-universal spatial and temporal relevance of these behavioural forms and principles of composition.

## Presence in the Past

Examples in the historic selection are typically developments that lack architects. In the case of vernacular architecture, the community intending to build, the designer and the builder tend to be the same as a rule, and their relationship is basically different than that typical of the 20th century. Their close connections are the guarantee of an in-depth knowledge of needs and the adequacy of responses. As a result, practical considerations and architectural responses to functional challenges are reflected in these building complexes in a much more self-evident, legible way. Enclosure-type developments in Africa, the kraals and ksars, were fostered by formations of rites performed around a fire and thus have evolved into estates and villages that offer shelter and exist even today. Although the traceries of developments, the system of lines and patches were created by the users’ trivial considerations, without any kind of superior principle of composition, they reflect the same kind of co-ordination and orderliness as an architectural work. Later examples from the classical period of architectural art are also excitingly educational, since they exemplify an approach prioritizing the clarity of organisation and structuring above all. The hermitage in Majk, the impassionate sequences of residential buildings in the harbour of Copenhagen, as well as England’s much-favoured circuses that radiate perfection are all results of the same gesture: seeking the way out of the organically grown multitude of buildings of medieval towns and cities that sunk into fanciful and vague non-transparency.

## The Garden in the Past

Venues for life and work used to be less separate throughout the centuries than they are today. Activities associated with the ground, garden and courtyard filled the days of the majority of people, and thus gardens were integral parts of their residential environment. Now the question is more about the method of use, the place and size of the garden. In certain regions, the protective function of being fenced in (or enclosed) used to be more important centuries ago than it is today, and residential buildings with their stone-walled gardens combined to make up minor fortifications in the course of time. For some communities, the garden had a different role and thus evolved as the venue for recreation, socializing and a sense of belonging. Attachment to nature or to semi-nature (a smaller personalised part of it) used to be more versatile and much more powerful than today.

## Why is Typology Important?

Typologies convey the genome of continuity by arbitrarily enlarging individual layers, stripping the primary meaning of the spectacle from the genuine contents. The system of viewpoints applied tends to be subjective one, and it only draws attention to the permanence of certain principles of composition. In line with our observations, distinguishing features may be described within a matrix. One of the constituents of this matrix is the response of the development to its environment, which can be either the “fill” model or the “growing” kind. The other component is the internal system or organisation of the development, which may be a pattern, lane or cohesion.

### Fill

This is a finite and complete system confined within a frame. The geometry defining it may be a faculty or endowment, but the development itself may also create for itself the form closing in on itself. The attitude to the frame is varied and versatile. The development by the Fuggers in Augsburg continues and tidies incomplete gestures in the man-made environment. Bispukin’s fortified marshy island is fed by topological features. Sardinia, another island, features nuraghi, offering shelter by creating walllike enclosures.

### Growth

The most significant distinguishing feature of this type is open-endedness. The adjective “growing” does not necessarily mean any change to the structure. More typically, it refers to the endlessly reproducible inner logic of the co-ordination of its constituents. There are no exact boundaries and confines here that could be relied upon as topographical features of the site, and environmental factors do not force the development to turn away or shut itself up. A fine example of additive, growing structures is Çatal Hüyük, where the dimensions of the settlement were only limited by the number of inhabitants.

### Pattern

The most significant, vital feature of pattern is that it is a complex multi-layer system. Besides tracery, its intense spatiality also defines its character. As opposed to the linear nature of the “interstice” or “direction” type, its infilling nature is more accentuated. Its role is to fill in larger surfaces by smaller components featuring similar function and scale according to the logic of a certain system. It creates the development by approaching it from the aspect of built components – either additively, following the logic of African kasbahs, or negatively, by seizure or cutting-out, like in the case of the town of Olynthos. The composition often evolves by building in many layers, by dividing the program into several essential components and grouping them in minor units like fractals, much like Dogon villages do.

### Lane

Here the inner, interim or intermediate space is essential. More important than the relationship with the place, it is a special, often arbitrary system, which sometimes creates a new quality, distinguishing and secluding itself from its environment. More often than not, the new hierarchical situations created by these “transitory” spaces prove to be the most liveable places. Numerous factors may influence the geometry, direction and internal system of tracery that these spaces feature – such as orientation, local climatic features, the preservation of the intimacy of neighbouring buildings, as well as views. The “directional houses” convey powerful militant architectural character, which is the vital condition of their lives and functioning. A multitude of houses built in areas with emphatic directions have the tendency to behave in strikingly similar ways.

### Cohesion

This is the type most in tune with the locational factors or the man-made situation. It is a synonym for adjustment. Adhesion is the means of being nourished from the valuable endowments presupposing a solid and powerful “enclosure-like” frame as a starting point. Owing to the versatility of this frame, it is applicable in several situations. By seizing upon existing, traceable, characteristic features, these developments may climb steep hillsides by adhering to the contour lines and terraces along them, to the counterforts or winding piers of a waterfront, to the paths and ways, as well as to the loose ends of fragmentary or frayed urban fabrics.

Organising the components of this matrix in a grid, we could classify six groups for the examples included in our selection.

Fill – Pattern, Fill – Lane, Fill – Cohesion, Growth – Pattern, Growth – Lane, Growth – Cohesion

